---
title: My thoughts on EECS Policy at UC Berkeley
date: 2020-12-10 12:00:00 +07:00
modified: 2020-12-10 12:00:00 +07:00
tags: [articles]
description: Suggestions on how to reform the Electrical Engineering & Computer Science program at UC Berkeley.
---

In late November, the EECS Department held a [Town Hall](https://piazza.com/class/hyq0br1u3kx7dg?cid=13790) to discuss reforming the L&S CS program at UC Berkeley. They also released a [feedback form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf2W89aDABkzWcvQbZW3O4FXtkiUdo8vvXAz-fVZ14cLYpNSA/viewform) soliciting student opinions, in which they stated:

> While our undergraduate CS program is very successful according to a number of metrics, our current status quo is not tenable for several reasons, affecting students, faculty and staff. The size of the program has become unsustainable. Student stress, and faculty/staff workloads are major concerns. The diversity of the program falls short in several dimensions.

In this article, I've copied my submission to the department in an effort to start a wider conversation about the culture, diversity, and focus of the CS program as a whole.

---

### STOP: What should a future Berkeley CS program stop that it is doing today, because it is harmful or counterproductive?

- **Stop using systems that don't scale to hundreds of students.**<br><br>
    - **Piazza is one of the most dysfunctional components of Berkeley computer science courses and advising.** Anyone who's used it in a large class (> 100 students) knows how poorly it scales; when you have a single thread with 50 followups, it becomes dysfunctional. Searching through posts doesn't work either, since the fuzzy search algorithm is pretty unhelpful. Piazza is one of the main reasons office hour queues are incredibly long (hint: look at CS 61C's 50+ unresolved followups from the Project 4 thread in Fa20). The dysfunctional EECS 101 Piazza also one of the main reasons why so many students turn to Reddit to ask course-related questions (e.g. waitlist, advising, etc.) – a single advising Piazza used by thousands of students becomes incredibly cluttered and doesn't scale. This is an EASY fix: just move to a different platform. I've heard good things about Ed. I don't know why the department hasn't already done this.<br><br>
    - **Online Office Hours** - when 100+ students enqueue themselves as soon as the OH queue opens, [things tend to go wrong](https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/k52vut/i_hate_cs_oh/), which leads to significant frustration when it comes to acquiring help. If we - as a department - are trying to create systems that scale to this many people, then we need to figure out how to create a queue (or an office hours policy, or a course policy - see below) that scales, because the current system clearly doesn't. If a class can't support provide support to all of its students in office hours, then extend deadlines, cancel projects, or change OH strategies to include things like common mistakes docs, private Piazza posts when appropriate, etc. - and, encourage peer-to-peer support! See the next bullet point. <br><br>
- **Stop criminalizing collaboration.** Instead, create department-wide collaboration & academic integrity policies, along with a department-wide honor code. In the three years that I've been taking CS classes, the variance in what is considered "cheating" has varied HUGELY. I personally think that poorly-designed anti-cheating policies are the root cause of toxic culture, lack of scalability in course support, and student stress in general.<br><br>
    - **Policies that explicitly ban all instances of looking at someone else's code are destructive policies.** Consider classes like CS 162 and CS 61C: both of these classes have difficult projects written in C - and lots of places where small mistakes may arise. It's both inefficient and insensible for TA's to help every student debug issues on these projects, but when groups are banned from helping each other work through GDB & debug complex projects, every single student/group attempts to seek help from a very limited number of TA's, who are often unable to pinpoint what is often a singular C error in 500+ lines of C.<br><br>
        Sure, students helping other students may result in code looking more similar; however, consider the options we're dealing with here: either (a) students help each other debug and catch syntax errors - e.g. using a pointer or an address - POSSIBLY resulting in projects with similar design patterns, or (b) students don't help each other, OH queues overflow, Piazza collapses, and large amounts of students PNP or late drop classes out of frustration. <br><br>
    - **Policies that criminalize whiteboarding with other students are destructive policies.** It literally blows my mind that this is a quote from the [CS 61C academic integrity policy](https://cs61c.org/fa20/policies): "We don’t want you sharing approaches, ideas, code or whiteboarding with other students." WE NEED TO RETHINK THIS. Students shouldn't be banned from whiteboarding with other students in ANYTHING other than an exam. Homeworks, projects, etc. - these are all opportunities for collaboration, places to learn from one's peers - and exams are where these skills are/should be tested on an individual basis.<br><br>
    - **Posts that threaten harsh consequences for academic integrity violations have HUGELY negative implications for culture.** Every semester, there's always a handful of classes that put out threatening messages. To paraphrase one of them, "we are investigating several instances of academic dishonesty; if you do not come forward and we find out, you will receive a negative grade and be reported to the office of academic conduct." These threatening messages cause a wide variety of harms, including but not limited to: panic attacks for innocent students who fear they might be flagged as false positives, creating an environment in which everyone thinks everyone else is cheating, and creating an us-vs-them student-vs-staff environment all around. These threats might find a handful of cheaters (what's a handful? 5%? 10%? honestly, I don't really care) – but for the MAJORITY of the class, which is what we should focus on as a department, these threats simply create undue stress and toxicity. <br><br>
    - **Instead, classes should handle all instances of academic integrity discreetly.** It's really not that difficult, and makes a HUGE impact on mental health. <br>


### START: What should a future Berkeley CS program start achieving that it isn’t today?
- **Provide an explicit differentiating factor between EECS & L&S CS. Alternatively, kill both of them and provide some sort of merged CS major with concentrations with an option to declare at application time and two-years in with holistic review.**
<br><br>
  - **Admit rates shouldn't be the deciding factor for a high school senior deciding between EECS and L&S CS!** Every year around admissions, Reddit/College Confidential see a FLOOD of students confused between L&S CS and EECS, and it's hard to provide explicit advice to someone who's trying to decide between which one to apply to. I'm not sure if there's a way to verify this other than polling a random sample of admitted students, but from anecdotal experience, many people I know who applied into L&S CS chose that path because it was "easier to get in" - a fact which, obviously, is true, but is a pretty terrible deciding factor.<br><br>
  - **Make EECS & L&S CS a single major in the College of Engineering, with an option to be admitted into it and an option to declare into it from an undeclared track.** The declaration process must be holistic (see below). Add tracks (like the ones on [HKN's course chart](https://hkn.eecs.berkeley.edu/assets/course-map-2019-da79ecbe2fc25e6b6349b8931364890032b8d51aacaccea65151ae98316f0587.png)) to allow flexibility between EE-focus, CS-focus, ML-focus, etc. and experiment with using these tracks to solve the class size problem. Maybe this is something that branches off into a College of Computing, which could offer the Data Science major in addition to the EECS major.<br><br>
  - **A holistic review process provides SIGNIFICANT advantages over the current GPA-based system.**<br><br>
    - **The GPA cap on 61A, 61B, and 70 provides a significant advantage to students with prior knowledge in any/all of these areas.** Take CS 70 as an example: anecdotally, international students (namely students from India & China) often come in with some background knowledge in probability (it's a known fact that other countries are better than us at teaching math) - so these students are already at an advantage when it comes to getting a high grade in that class. Holistic review could consider GPA in these classes in the context of prior experience, instead of throwing everything in one's past out the window when the moment they step foot in Wheeler Hall (as idealistic as that sounds, we know it doesn't work…).<br><br>
    - **Holistic review is a more equitable process than a raw GPA cap, which could yield a more diverse department.** When it comes to diversity, CoE's hands are tied at an admissions level (due to Prop 16) – so the strides in diversity HAVE to come from holistic review. This doesn't mean forced diversity - it simply means creating review policies that take prior experience into account. CoE's EECS admissions policies as they stand are INCREDIBLY disadvantageous to both low-income families and underrepresented minorities. [Quick stats:](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Kf3iTX4XNQlVlpn4YcvDYDdaAKSPTpZQ8GkObT6EpQc/edit#slide=id.g904ac99979_0_34) low-income students are 3x less likely to get into EECS than high-income students, first-gen/low-income students are 4x less likely, and URM/low-income students have a 1-2% admit rate into EECS compared to Asian/high-income students with a 16% admit rate into EECS (8x less likely). I honestly don't know how much of these stats can/will change - what I do know is that it's in the department's best interest to do whatever is possible to create an equitable playing field for students declaring into the CS major once they're admitted undeclared or into L&S.<br><br>
    - **It doesn't make sense that a student's contributions to side projects, internships, research, open-source endeavors, etc. are thrown out the window when it comes to declaring the CS major.** Maybe taking these into account will take some pressure away from solely achieving that hard 3.3 cutoff - instead of spending dead week doing quite literally every single HKN practice exam available, maybe they'll spend dead week exploring an open-source project that relates to a class they're taking – or building their own side project using the Python/Java/C they learned in their intro classes.<br><br>
    - *(If you disagree with any of these arguments, that's totally expected - it's hard to come up with a perfect policy, but this is what I currently think is the best option (compared to either raising the GPA cap, or moving to a lottery-based system). Tell the department what you think should happen using the [feedback form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf2W89aDABkzWcvQbZW3O4FXtkiUdo8vvXAz-fVZ14cLYpNSA/viewform).) <br>*<br>
- **Provide explicit transparency in course grading policies.** Personally, I think one of the worst parts of my Berkeley experience has been walking away from a test, a friend asking me how it went, and me responding something along the lines of "I'll only know when the curve comes out." I don't know if this is a fundamental problem with how education works or if it's something that's specific to how exams are designed, but students should be able to walk away from exams with a general sense of how well they did, rather than walking away feeling destroyed - only to realize that the average was only a 35% or 40% two weeks later. <br><br>
    - **One way to mitigate this is to create scalable gradebook infrastructure, with support for DSP and extension requests.** 61B uses something called [Beacon](https://beacon.datastructur.es/auth/login) (which I don't know too much about) – 161 uses custom home-grown grade reports. 162 uses a home-grown course [autograder](https://cs162.org/autograder/dashboard/assignments/) website that lists all assignments, midterms, etc. It shouldn't take too much engineering talent to build a system that allows students to see how well they're doing, instead of having to guess (or turn to Reddit to ask what their chances of passing a class or getting an A are - which, yes, [is](https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/k9le76/panicking_about_cs_70/) [something](https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/k9ze26/cs70_grade_question_yes_another_one/) [that](https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/k7bzak/cs_70_grade_estimate/) [they](https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/k55626/pnp_cs_70/) [do](https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/k3sarp/cs_70_advice/)).<br><br>
- **Create a much, much better EECS alumni network.** If such a thing even exists, we clearly suck at promoting it as a department. I don't know if we have somebody who's explicitly in charge of soliciting donations from affluent EECS/CS graduates, but if we don't, we should hire someone whose sole job is to search for EECS/CS alumni and convince them to donate DIRECTLY to the EECS program. We're the number one public university for CS, and tech/CS is the economy's largest winner right now - where is the revenue stream? There have to be Berkeley EECS/CoE grads who've made it big...<br><br>
- **Create better partnerships with industry to solicit new avenues of course funding.** We clearly aren't going to get more revenue from central campus to make this department better; we really need to figure out better ways to raise funding directly from new revenue streams. The Apple SoC program is an example of this working well (or at least it seems) - we should figure out what we can add to our department to make more of that happen. Maybe it's creating special-topics classes that are dedicated to working on class-wide open source projects, and getting companies/nonprofits that specialize in open source to fund us.<br><br>
- **Strive for a demographically diverse course staff in both lower-division and upper-division courses.** Certain lower-division classes (e.g. [EE 16A](https://eecs16a.org/#staff)) place emphasis on hiring an equal amount of female course staff as male course staff. For many students, seeing people they can relate to in positions of authority creates a much more positive course environment. Unfortunately, it seems difficult for a handful of upper-division courses to accomplish gender balance to the extent of lower-division courses (e.g. [CS 162](https://cs162.org/staff/)). Not really sure how to fix this issue...but it's worth noting.<br><br>



### KEEP: What positive aspects of the Berkeley CS program are important to keep as we reform admissions and course sizes?

- **A large population of undergraduate TA's and course staff.** Creating opportunities for undergrads to participate in positions that shape the undergraduate experience is instrumental in reducing student stress and improving campus culture. Instead of an "us-vs-them" mentality, classes with undergraduate head TA's and largely undergraduate course staff provide opportunities for course staff to connect directly (formally and informally) with students, which allows for tighter feedback loops and more perceptive course policies. An example of this lies in course proctoring policies - some of the most well-received remote proctoring policies in Su20 were designed by classes led by undergraduate TA's.<br> <br>
  - **The workload of TA's across different courses within EECS should be addressed.** From personal experience, the workload of an 8-hour TA for a course of 1000 students is often remarkably different than that of a course of 200. I'm not sure if there's a way to fix this particular issue other than more hands-on management of course staff & reporting of working hours - something that I don't know if I'd particularly want, as a TA - but it is certainly frustrating to hear the workload of TA's in certain classes (e.g. CS 61C) be so disparate from others.
<br>
<br>

- **Strong department-wide support for peer-to-peer support communities (e.g. CSM, CSK, etc).** These communities are how hundreds of students find support networks in their first two years, and as introductory class sizes have exploded, these communities have become a foundational component of the lower-division experience for the Berkeley Computer Science program.

<br>

> If you have comments on any of this – or agree/disagree strongly – I'd love to chat! I'm reachable via my Berkeley email (shomil@).